<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I: The Classification of Crowds</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-3-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">The Classification of Crowds</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The general divisions of crowds⁠—Their classification.</p>
			</header>
			<p>We have sketched in this work the general characteristics common to psychological crowds. It remains to point out the particular characteristics which accompany those of a general order in the different categories of collectivities, when they are transformed into a crowd under the influences of the proper exciting causes. We will, first of all, set forth in a few words a classification of crowds.</p>
			<p>Our starting-point will be the simple multitude. Its most inferior form is met with when the multitude is composed of individuals belonging to different races. In this case its only common bond of union is the will, more or less respected of a chief. The barbarians of very diverse origin who during several centuries invaded the Roman Empire, may be cited as a specimen of multitudes of this kind.</p>
			<p>On a higher level than these multitudes composed of different races are those which under certain influences have acquired common characteristics, and have ended by forming a single race. They present at times characteristics peculiar to crowds, but these characteristics are overruled to a greater or less extent by racial considerations.</p>
			<p>These two kinds of multitudes may, under certain influences investigated in this work, be transformed into organised or psychological crowds. We shall break up these organised crowds into the following divisions:⁠—</p>
			<p>1. Anonymous crowds (street<br/>
			crowds, for example).<br/>
			A. Heterogeneous 2. Crowds not anonymous<br/>
			crowds. (juries, parliamentary assemblies,<br/>
			<abbr>etc.</abbr>).<br/>
			1. Sects (political sects,<br/>
			religious sects, <abbr>etc.</abbr>).<br/>
			2. Castes (the military caste,<br/>
			B. Homogeneous the priestly caste, the<br/>
			crowds. working caste, <abbr>etc.</abbr>).<br/>
			3. Classes (the middle classes,<br/>
			the peasant classes, <abbr>etc.</abbr>).<br/></p>
			<p>We will point out briefly the distinguishing characteristics of these different categories of crowds.</p>
			<section id="chapter-3-1-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<hgroup>
						<h4 epub:type="ordinal">1</h4>
						<h5 epub:type="title">Heterogeneous Crowds</h5>
					</hgroup>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Different varieties of them⁠—The influence of race⁠—The spirit of the crowd is weak in proportion as the spirit of the race is strong⁠—The spirit of the race represents the civilised state and the spirit of the crowd the barbarian state.</p>
				</header>
				<p>It is these collectivities whose characteristics have been studied in this volume. They are composed of individuals of any description, of any profession, and any degree of intelligence.</p>
				<p>We are now aware that by the mere fact that men form part of a crowd engaged in action, their collective psychology differs essentially from their individual psychology, and their intelligence is affected by this differentiation. We have seen that intelligence is without influence in collectivities, they being solely under the sway of unconscious sentiments.</p>
				<p>A fundamental factor, that of race, allows of a tolerably thorough differentiation of the various heterogeneous crowds.</p>
				<p>We have often referred already to the part played by race, and have shown it to be the most powerful of the factors capable of determining men’s actions. Its action is also to be traced in the character of crowds. A crowd composed of individuals assembled at haphazard, but all of them Englishmen or Chinamen, will differ widely from another crowd also composed of individuals of any and every description, but of other races⁠—Russians, Frenchmen, or Spaniards, for example.</p>
				<p>The wide divergencies which their inherited mental constitution creates in men’s modes of feeling and thinking at once come into prominence when, which rarely happens, circumstances gather together in the same crowd and in fairly equal proportions individuals of different nationality, and this occurs, however identical in appearance be the interests which provoked the gathering. The efforts made by the socialists to assemble in great congresses the representatives of the working-class populations of different countries, have always ended in the most pronounced discord. A Latin crowd, however revolutionary or however conservative it be supposed, will invariably appeal to the intervention of the State to realise its demands. It is always distinguished by a marked tendency towards centralisation and by a leaning, more or less pronounced, in favour of a dictatorship. An English or an American crowd, on the contrary, sets no store on the State, and only appeals to private initiative. A French crowd lays particular weight on equality and an English crowd on liberty. These differences of race explain how it is that there are almost as many different forms of socialism and democracy as there are nations.</p>
				<p>The genius of the race, then, exerts a paramount influence upon the dispositions of a crowd. It is the powerful underlying force that limits its changes of humour. It should be considered as an essential law that THE INFERIOR CHARACTERISTICS OF CROWDS ARE THE LESS ACCENTUATED IN PROPORTION AS THE SPIRIT OF THE RACE IS STRONG. The crowd state and the domination of crowds is equivalent to the barbarian state, or to a return to it. It is by the acquisition of a solidly constituted collective spirit that the race frees itself to a greater and greater extent from the unreflecting power of crowds, and emerges from the barbarian state. The only important classification to be made of heterogeneous crowds, apart from that based on racial considerations, is to separate them into anonymous crowds, such as street crowds, and crowds not anonymous⁠—deliberative assemblies and juries, for example. The sentiment of responsibility absent from crowds of the first description and developed in those of the second often gives a very different tendency to their respective acts.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-1-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<hgroup>
						<h4 epub:type="ordinal">2</h4>
						<h5 epub:type="title">Homogeneous Crowds</h5>
					</hgroup>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">HOMOGENEOUS CROWDS. Their different varieties⁠—Sects, castes, and classes.</p>
				</header>
				<p>Homogeneous crowds include: 1. Sects; 2. Castes; 3. Classes.</p>
				<p>The SECT represents the first step in the process of organisation of homogeneous crowds. A sect includes individuals differing greatly as to their education, their professions, and the class of society to which they belong, and with their common beliefs as the connecting link. Examples in point are religious and political sects.</p>
				<p>The CASTE represents the highest degree of organisation of which the crowd is susceptible. While the sect includes individuals of very different professions, degrees of education and social surrounding, who are only linked together by the beliefs they hold in common, the caste is composed of individuals of the same profession, and in consequence similarly educated and of much the same social status. Examples in point are the military and priestly castes.</p>
				<p>The CLASS is formed of individuals of diverse origin, linked together not by a community of beliefs, as are the members of a sect, or by common professional occupations, as are the members of a caste, but by certain interests and certain habits of life and education almost identical. The middle class and the agricultural class are examples.</p>
				<p>Being only concerned in this work with heterogeneous crowds, and reserving the study of homogeneous crowds (sects, castes, and classes) for another volume, I shall not insist here on the characteristics of crowds of this latter kind. I shall conclude this study of heterogeneous crowds by the examination of a few typical and distinct categories of crowds.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
