<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2-2" epub:type="chapter" data-parent="book-2">
			<hgroup><h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3><h4 epub:type="title">The Immediate Factors of the Opinions of Crowds</h4></hgroup>

<p>1. IMAGES, WORDS AND FORMULAE. The magical power of words
and formulae—The power of words bound up with the images they
evoke, and independent of their real sense—These images vary
from age to age, and from race to race—The wear and tear of
words—Examples of the considerable variations of sense of
much-used words—The political utility of baptizing old things
with new names when the words by which they were designated
produced an unfavourable impression on the masses— variations of
the sense of words in consequence of race differences—The
different meanings of the word "democracy" in Europe and America.
2. ILLUSIONS. Their importance—They are to be found at the
root of all civilisations—The social necessity of
illusions—Crowds always prefer them to truths.   3.
EXPERIENCE. Experience alone can fix in the mind of crowds truths
become necessary and destroy illusions grown
dangerous—Experience is only effective on the condition that it
be frequently repeated—The cost of the experiences requisite to
persuade crowds.   4. REASON. The nullity of its influence on
crowds—Crowds only to be influenced by their unconscious
sentiments— The role of logic in history—The secret causes of
improbable events.</p>

<p style="margin-top: 2em">We have just investigated the remote and preparatory factors
which give the mind of crowds a special receptivity, and make
possible therein the growth of certain sentiments and certain
ideas.  It now remains for us to study the factors capable of
acting in a direct manner.  We shall see in a forthcoming chapter
how these factors should be put in force in order that they may
produce their full effect.</p>

<p>In the first part of this work we studied the sentiments, ideas,
and methods of reasoning of collective bodies, and from the
knowledge thus acquired it would evidently be possible to deduce
in a general way the means of making an impression on their mind.
We already know what strikes the imagination of crowds, and are
acquainted with the power and contagiousness of suggestions, of
those especially that are presented under the form of images.
However, as suggestions may proceed from very different sources,
the factors capable of acting on the minds of crowds may differ
considerably.  It is necessary, then, to study them separately.
This is not a useless study.  Crowds are somewhat like the sphinx
of ancient fable: it is necessary to arrive at a solution of the
problems offered by their psychology or to resign ourselves to
being devoured by them.</p>

<h5>1. IMAGES, WORDS, AND FORMULAS</h5>

<p style="margin-top: 2em">When studying the imagination of crowds we saw that it is
particularly open to the impressions produced by images.  These
images do not always lie ready to hand, but it is possible to
evoke them by the judicious employment of words and formulas.
Handled with art, they possess in sober truth the mysterious
power formerly attributed to them by the adepts of magic.  They
cause the birth in the minds of crowds of the most formidable
tempests, which in turn they are capable of stilling.  A pyramid
far loftier than that of old Cheops could be raised merely with
the bones of men who have been victims of the power of words and
formulas.</p>

<p>The power of words is bound up with the images they evoke, and is
quite independent of their real significance.  Words whose sense
is the most ill-defined are sometimes those that possess the most
influence.  Such, for example, are the terms democracy,
socialism, equality, liberty, &amp;c., whose meaning is so vague that
bulky volumes do not suffice to precisely fix it.  Yet it is
certain that a truly magical power is attached to those short
syllables, as if they contained the solution of all problems.
They synthesise the most diverse unconscious aspirations and the
hope of their realisation.</p>

<p>Reason and arguments are incapable of combatting certain words
and formulas.  They are uttered with solemnity in the presence of
crowds, and as soon as they have been pronounced an expression of
respect is visible on every countenance, and all heads are bowed.
By many they are considered as natural forces, as supernatural
powers.  They evoke grandiose and vague images in men's minds,
but this very vagueness that wraps them in obscurity augments
their mysterious power.  They are the mysterious divinities
hidden behind the tabernacle, which the devout only approach in
fear and trembling.</p>

<p>The images evoked by words being independent of their sense, they
vary from age to age and from people to people, the formulas
remaining identical.  Certain transitory images are attached to
certain words: the word is merely as it were the button of an
electric bell that calls them up.</p>

<p>All words and all formulas do not possess the power of evoking
images, while there are some which have once had this power, but
lose it in the course of use, and cease to waken any response in
the mind.  They then become vain sounds, whose principal utility
is to relieve the person who employs them of the obligation of
thinking.  Armed with a small stock of formulas and commonplaces
learnt while we are young, we possess all that is needed to
traverse life without the tiring necessity of having to reflect
on anything whatever.</p>

<p>If any particular language be studied, it is seen that the words
of which it is composed change rather slowly in the course of
ages, while the images these words evoke or the meaning attached
to them changes ceaselessly.  This is the reason why, in another
work, I have arrived at the conclusion that the absolute
translation of a language, especially of a dead language, is
totally impossible.  What do we do in reality when we substitute
a French for a Latin, Greek, or Sanscrit expression, or even when
we endeavour to understand a book written in our own tongue two
or three centuries back?  We merely put the images and ideas with
which modern life has endowed our intelligence in the place of
absolutely distinct notions and images which ancient life had
brought into being in the mind of races submitted to conditions
of existence having no analogy with our own.  When the men of the
Revolution imagined they were copying the Greeks and Romans, what
were they doing except giving to ancient words a sense the latter
had never had?  What resemblance can possibly exist between the
institutions of the Greeks and those designated to-day by
corresponding words?  A republic at that epoch was an essentially
aristocratic institution, formed of a reunion of petty despots
ruling over a crowd of slaves kept in the most absolute
subjection.  These communal aristocracies, based on slavery,
could not have existed for a moment without it.</p>

<p>The word "liberty," again, what signification could it have in
any way resembling that we attribute to it to-day at a period
when the possibility of the liberty of thought was not even
suspected, and when there was no greater and more exceptional
crime than that of discussing the gods, the laws and the customs
of the city?  What did such a word as "fatherland" signify to an
Athenian or Spartan unless it were the cult of Athens or Sparta,
and in no wise that of Greece, composed of rival cities always at
war with each other?  What meaning had the same word "fatherland"
among the ancient Gauls, divided into rival tribes and races, and
possessing different languages and religions, and who were easily
vanquished by Caesar because he always found allies among them?
It was Rome that made a country of Gaul by endowing it with
political and religious unity.  Without going back so far,
scarcely two centuries ago, is it to be believed that this same
notion of a fatherland was conceived to have the same meaning as
at present by French princes like the great Conde, who allied
themselves with the foreigner against their sovereign?  And yet
again, the same word had it not a sense very different from the
modern for the French royalist emigrants, who thought they obeyed
the laws of honour in fighting against France, and who from their
point of view did indeed obey them, since the feudal law bound
the vassal to the lord and not to the soil, so that where the
sovereign was there was the true fatherland?</p>

<p>Numerous are the words whose meaning has thus profoundly changed
from age to age—words which we can only arrive at understanding
in the sense in which they were formerly understood after a long
effort.  It has been said with truth that much study is necessary
merely to arrive at conceiving what was signified to our great
grandfathers by such words as the "king" and the "royal family."
What, then, is likely to be the case with terms still more
complex?</p>

<p>Words, then, have only mobile and transitory significations which
change from age to age and people to people; and when we desire
to exert an influence by their means on the crowd what it is
requisite to know is the meaning given them by the crowd at a
given moment, and not the meaning which they formerly had or may
yet have for individuals of a different mental constitution.</p>

<p>Thus, when crowds have come, as the result of political upheavals
or changes of belief, to acquire a profound antipathy for the
images evoked by certain words, the first duty of the true
statesman is to change the words without, of course, laying hands
on the things themselves, the latter being too intimately bound
up with the inherited constitution to be transformed.  The
judicious Tocqueville long ago made the remark that the work of
the consulate and the empire consisted more particularly in the
clothing with new words of the greater part of the institutions
of the past—that is to say, in replacing words evoking
disagreeable images in the imagination of the crowd by other
words of which the novelty prevented such evocations.  The
"taille" or tallage has become the land tax; the "gabelle," the
tax on salt; the "aids," the indirect contributions and the
consolidated duties; the tax on trade companies and guilds, the
license, &amp;c.</p>

<p>One of the most essential functions of statesmen consists, then,
in baptizing with popular or, at any rate, indifferent words
things the crowd cannot endure under their old names.  The power
of words is so great that it suffices to designate in well-chosen
terms the most odious things to make them acceptable to crowds.
Taine justly observes that it was by invoking liberty and
fraternity—words very popular at the time— that the Jacobins
were able "to install a despotism worthy of Dahomey, a tribunal
similar to that of the Inquisition, and to accomplish human
hecatombs akin to those of ancient Mexico."  The art of those who
govern, as is the case with the art of advocates, consists above
all in the science of employing words.  One of the greatest
difficulties of this art is, that in one and the same society the
same words most often have very different meanings for the
different social classes, who employ in appearance the same
words, but never speak the same language.</p>

<p>In the preceding examples it is especially time that has been
made to intervene as the principal factor in the changing of the
meaning of words.  If, however, we also make race intervene, we
shall then see that, at the same period, among peoples equally
civilised but of different race, the same words very often
correspond to extremely dissimilar ideas.  It is impossible to
understand these differences without having travelled much, and
for this reason I shall not insist upon them.  I shall confine
myself to observing that it is precisely the words most often
employed by the masses which among different peoples possess the
most different meanings.  Such is the case, for instance, with
the words "democracy" and "socialism" in such frequent use
nowadays.</p>

<p>In reality they correspond to quite contrary ideas and images in
the Latin and Anglo-Saxon mind.  For the Latin peoples the word
"democracy" signifies more especially the subordination of the
will and the initiative of the individual to the will and the
initiative of the community represented by the State.  It is the
State that is charged, to a greater and greater degree, with the
direction of everything, the centralisation, the monopolisation,
and the manufacture of everything.  To the State it is that all
parties without exception, radicals, socialists, or monarchists,
constantly appeal.  Among the Anglo-Saxons and notably in America
this same word "democracy" signifies, on the contrary, the
intense development of the will of the individual, and as
complete a subordination as possible of the State, which, with
the exception of the police, the army, and diplomatic relations,
is not allowed the direction of anything, not even of public
instruction.  It is seen, then, that the same word which
signifies for one people the subordination of the will and the
initiative of the individual and the preponderance of the State,
signifies for another the excessive development of the will and
the initiative of the individual and the complete subordination
of the State.[13]</p>

<p style="margin-top: 2em">[13] In my book, "The Psychological Laws of the Evolution of
Peoples," I have insisted at length on the differences which
distinguish the Latin democratic ideal from the Anglo-Saxon
democratic ideal.  Independently, and as the result of his
travels, M. Paul Bourget has arrived, in his quite recent book,
"Outre-Mer," at conclusions almost identical with mine.</p>

<h3 style="margin-top: 3em">2. ILLUSIONS</h3>

<p style="margin-top: 2em">From the dawn of civilisation onwards crowds have always
undergone the influence of illusions.  It is to the creators of
illusions that they have raised more temples, statues, and altars
than to any other class of men.  Whether it be the religious
illusions of the past or the philosophic and social illusions of
the present, these formidable sovereign powers are always found
at the head of all the civilisations that have successively
flourished on our planet.  It is in their name that were built
the temples of Chaldea and Egypt and the religious edifices of
the Middle Ages, and that a vast upheaval shook the whole of
Europe a century ago, and there is not one of our political,
artistic, or social conceptions that is free from their powerful
impress.  Occasionally, at the cost of terrible disturbances, man
overthrows them, but he seems condemned to always set them up
again.  Without them he would never have emerged from his
primitive barbarian state, and without them again he would soon
return to it.  Doubtless they are futile shadows; but these
children of our dreams have forced the nations to create whatever
the arts may boast of splendour or civilisation of greatness.</p>

<p>"If one destroyed in museums and libraries, if one hurled down on
the flagstones before the churches all the works and all the
monuments of art that religions have inspired, what would remain
of the great dreams of humanity?  To give to men that portion of
hope and illusion without which they cannot live, such is the
reason for the existence of gods, heroes, and poets.  During
fifty years science appeared to undertake this task.  But science
has been compromised in hearts hungering after the ideal, because
it does not dare to be lavish enough of promises, because it
cannot lie."[14]</p>

<p style="margin-top: 2em">[14] Daniel Lesueur.</p>

<p style="margin-top: 3em">The philosophers of the last century devoted themselves with
fervour to the destruction of the religious, political, and
social illusions on which our forefathers had lived for a long
tale of centuries.  By destroying them they have dried up the
springs of hope and resignation.  Behind the immolated chimeras
they came face to face with the blind and silent forces of
nature, which are inexorable to weakness and ignore pity.</p>

<p>Notwithstanding all its progress, philosophy has been unable as
yet to offer the masses any ideal that can charm them; but, as
they must have their illusions at all cost, they turn
instinctively, as the insect seeks the light, to the rhetoricians
who accord them what they want.  Not truth, but error has always
been the chief factor in the evolution of nations, and the reason
why socialism is so powerful to-day is that it constitutes the
last illusion that is still vital.  In spite of all scientific
demonstrations it continues on the increase.  Its principal
strength lies in the fact that it is championed by minds
sufficiently ignorant of things as they are in reality to venture
boldly to promise mankind happiness.  The social illusion reigns
to-day upon all the heaped-up ruins of the past, and to it
belongs the future.  The masses have never thirsted after truth.
They turn aside from evidence that is not to their taste,
preferring to deify error, if error seduce them.  Whoever can
supply them with illusions is easily their master; whoever
attempts to destroy their illusions is always their victim.</p>

<h4 style="margin-top: 2em">3. EXPERIENCE</h4>

<p style="margin-top: 2em">Experience constitutes almost the only effective process by which
a truth may be solidly established in the mind of the masses, and
illusions grown too dangerous be destroyed.  To this end,
however, it is necessary that the experience should take place on
a very large scale, and be very frequently repeated.  The
experiences undergone by one generation are useless, as a rule,
for the generation that follows, which is the reason why
historical facts, cited with a view to demonstration, serve no
purpose.  Their only utility is to prove to what an extent
experiences need to be repeated from age to age to exert any
influence, or to be successful in merely shaking an erroneous
opinion when it is solidly implanted in the mind of the masses.</p>

<p>Our century and that which preceded it will doubtless be alluded
to by historians as an era of curious experiments, which in no
other age have been tried in such number.</p>

<p>The most gigantic of these experiments was the French Revolution.
To find out that a society is not to be refashioned from top to
bottom in accordance with the dictates of pure reason, it was
necessary that several millions of men should be massacred and
that Europe should be profoundly disturbed for a period of twenty
years.  To prove to us experimentally that dictators cost the
nations who acclaim them dear, two ruinous experiences have been
required in fifty years, and in spite of their clearness they do
not seem to have been sufficiently convincing.  The first,
nevertheless, cost three millions of men and an invasion, the
second involved a loss of territory, and carried in its wake the
necessity for permanent armies.  A third was almost attempted not
long since, and will assuredly be attempted one day.  To bring an
entire nation to admit that the huge German army was not, as was
currently alleged thirty years ago, a sort of harmless national
guard,[15] the terrible war which cost us so dear had to take
place.  To bring about the recognition that Protection ruins the
nations who adopt it, at least twenty years of disastrous
experience will be needful.  These examples might be indefinitely
multiplied.</p>

<p style="margin-top: 2em">[15] The opinion of the crowd was formed in this case by those
rough-and-ready associations of dissimilar things, the mechanism
of which I have previously explained.  The French national guard
of that period, being composed of peaceable shopkeepers, utterly
lacking in discipline and quite incapable of being taken
seriously, whatever bore a similar name, evoked the same
conception and was considered in consequence as harmless.  The
error of the crowd was shared at the time by its leaders, as
happens so often in connection with opinions dealing with
generalisations.  In a speech made in the Chamber on the 31st of
December, 1867, and quoted in a book by M. E. Ollivier that has
appeared recently, a statesman who often followed the opinion of
the crowd but was never in advance of it—I allude to M.
Thiers—declared that Prussia only possessed a national guard
analogous to that of France, and in consequence without
importance, in addition to a regular army about equal to the
French regular army; assertions about as accurate as the
predictions of the same statesman as to the insignificant future
reserved for railways.</p>

<h3 style="margin-top: 3em">4. REASON</h3>

<p style="margin-top: 2em">In enumerating the factors capable of making an impression on the
minds of crowds all mention of reason might be dispensed with,
were it not necessary to point out the negative value of its
influence.</p>

<p>We have already shown that crowds are not to be influenced by
reasoning, and can only comprehend rough-and-ready associations
of ideas.  The orators who know how to make an impression upon
them always appeal in consequence to their sentiments and never
to their reason.  The laws of logic have no action on crowds.[16]
To bring home conviction to crowds it is necessary first of all
to thoroughly comprehend the sentiments by which they are
animated, to pretend to share these sentiments, then to endeavour
to modify them by calling up, by means of rudimentary
associations, certain eminently suggestive notions, to be
capable, if need be, of going back to the point of view from
which a start was made, and, above all, to divine from instant to
instant the sentiments to which one's discourse is giving birth.
This necessity of ceaselessly varying one's language in
accordance with the effect produced at the moment of speaking
deprives from the outset a prepared and studied harangue of all
efficaciousness.  In such a speech the orator follows his own
line of thought, not that of his hearers, and from this fact
alone his influence is annihilated.</p>

<p style="margin-top: 2em">[16] My first observations with regard to the art of impressing
crowds and touching the slight assistance to be derived in this
connection from the rules of logic date back to the seige of
Paris, to the day when I saw conducted to the Louvre, where the
Government was then sitting, Marshal V——, whom a furious crowd
asserted they had surprised in the act of taking the plans of the
fortifications to sell them to the Prussians.  A member of the
Government (G. P——), a very celebrated orator, came out to
harangue the crowd, which was demanding the immediate execution
of the prisoner.  I had expected that the speaker would point out
the absurdity of the accusation by remarking that the accused
Marshal was positively one of those who had constructed the
fortifications, the plan of which, moreover, was on sale at every
booksellers.  To my immense stupefaction—I was very young
then—the speech was on quite different lines.  "Justice shall be
done," exclaimed the orator, advancing towards the prisoner, "and
pitiless justice.  Let the Government of the National Defence
conclude your inquiry.  In the meantime we will keep the prisoner
in custody."  At once calmed by this apparent concession, the
crowd broke up, and a quarter of an hour later the Marshal was
able to return home.  He would infallibly have been torn in
pieces had the speaker treated the infuriated crowd to the
logical arguments that my extreme youth induced me to consider as
very convincing.</p>

<p style="margin-top: 3em">Logical minds, accustomed to be convinced by a chain of somewhat
close reasoning, cannot avoid having recourse to this mode of
persuasion when addressing crowds, and the inability of their
arguments always surprises them.  "The usual mathematical
consequences based on the syllogism—that is, on associations of
identities—are imperative . . ." writes a logician.  "This
imperativeness would enforce the assent even of an inorganic mass
were it capable of following associations of identities."  This
is doubtless true, but a crowd is no more capable than an
inorganic mass of following such associations, nor even of
understanding them.  If the attempt be made to convince by
reasoning primitive minds—savages or children, for instance—the
slight value possessed by this method of arguing will be
understood.</p>

<p>It is not even necessary to descend so low as primitive beings to
obtain an insight into the utter powerlessness of reasoning when
it has to fight against sentiment.  Let us merely call to mind
how tenacious, for centuries long, have been religious
superstitions in contradiction with the simplest logic.  For
nearly two thousand years the most luminous geniuses have bowed
before their laws, and modern times have to be reached for their
veracity to be merely contested.  The Middle Ages and the
Renaissance possessed many enlightened men, but not a single man
who attained by reasoning to an appreciation of the childish side
of his superstitions, or who promulgated even a slight doubt as
to the misdeeds of the devil or the necessity of burning
sorcerers.</p>

<p>Should it be regretted that crowds are never guided by reason?
We would not venture to affirm it.  Without a doubt human reason
would not have availed to spur humanity along the path of
civilisation with the ardour and hardihood its illusions have
done.  These illusions, the offspring of those unconscious forces
by which we are led, were doubtless necessary.  Every race
carries in its mental constitution the laws of its destiny, and
it is, perhaps, these laws that it obeys with a resistless
impulse, even in the case of those of its impulses which
apparently are the most unreasoned.  It seems at times as if
nations were submitted to secret forces analogous to those which
compel the acorn to transform itself into an oak or a comet to
follow its orbit.</p>

<p>What little insight we can get into these forces must be sought
for in the general course of the evolution of a people, and not
in the isolated facts from which this evolution appears at times
to proceed.  Were these facts alone to be taken into
consideration, history would seem to be the result of a series of
improbable chances.  It was improbable that a Galilean carpenter
should become for two thousand years an all-powerful God in whose
name the most important civilisations were founded; improbable,
too, that a few bands of Arabs, emerging from their deserts,
should conquer the greater part of the old Graco-Roman world, and
establish an empire greater than that of Alexander; improbable,
again, that in Europe, at an advanced period of its development,
and when authority throughout it had been systematically
hierarchised, an obscure lieutenant of artillery should have
succeeded in reigning over a multitude of peoples and kings.</p>

<p>Let us leave reason, then, to philosophers, and not insist too
strongly on its intervention in the governing of men.  It is not
by reason, but most often in spite of it, that are created those
sentiments that are the mainsprings of all
civilisation—sentiments such as honour, self- sacrifice,
religious faith, patriotism, and the love of glory.</p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
